Hello everyone, today I'd like to talk about Harry Potter. Now I could do the standard video essay introduction for Harry Potter, you know, it's a series of books, a series of films, video games, a stage play, a whole bunch of merchandise and all that, but we all know who Harry Potter is, right? It'd be better if I started by explaining why I want to talk about Harry Potter today, and there's a few reasons. Firstly, there was recently another round of discussion about J.K. Rowling's goblins. In recent years there's been a few different types of discourse relating to Harry Potter that come and go on social media. People talk about Rowling's goblins being possibly similar to antisemitic stereotypes. People talk about the problematic natural slave race who like their slavery. The queerbaiting with characters who were stated by Rowling to be gay but never explicitly depicted as gay. Her attempts to retroactively add more diversity to the Harry Potter world than she initially depicted, and a whole host of other topics. This drive to re-examine and criticize Harry Potter is undoubtedly fuelled to some extent by the actions of the author in recent years. J.K. Rowling is a committed and very vocal opponent of trans rights. And well, I'm not going to rehash all that here. There are several videos on YouTube which thoroughly cover J.K. Rowling's transphobia and I'll link some of those below. But for our purposes today, all we need to know is that J.K. Rowling's statements on trans rights have put her at odds with a lot of people who previously enjoyed her work.

And people naturally want to work that out, right? How could a children's book author who wrote such a beloved series go on to be such a bigot? Perhaps the signs were there all along. Now, whenever it comes time to re-examine the Harry Potter series, I confess I feel very left out. I read the first three, maybe four books as a young lad, but then I guess I got too old for them, or maybe they just got too long. She really got away from the editors at some point. Those later books can be a real slog. But still, I wanted to know, how fair are these criticisms of Harry Potter? Do they hold water? Now, it wouldn't be exactly fair for me to start offering opinions having not read the books, so I went and read the Harry Potter books. I watched the movies, I watched the Fantastic Beasts movies, which were rubbish and weird. I read a whole bunch of Pottermore articles, the short stories from Hogwarts, the script of the stage play. I even read The Casual Vacancy and a few bits here and there of Rowling's detective series.

What all this means is I am now a certified Harry Potter expert and I can get involved in the discourse entirely guilt-free. So I'm going to do my own Harry Potter discourse retrospective today. There's a lot to talk about, and I think it's only fitting that we begin at the beginning. So, at the beginning of the first Harry Potter novel, The Philosopher's Stone, we are introduced to Harry's aunt and uncle, the Dursleys, and we follow his uncle Vernon Dursley as he goes about his day, noticing various magical folk celebrating the apparent demise of the series's antagonist, Lord Voldemort. Now, what do we learn about Vernon Dursley in the opening chapters of the first Harry Potter book? Well, he's quick to anger. He is narrow-minded. He dislikes anything out of the ordinary or improper, and he's bigoted towards people he sees as being different from himself. He's a conservative, basically. He and his wife are Rowling's liberal skewering of typical conservatives. She even has Vernon reading the Daily Mail in a later book. Vernon is verbally and physically abusive to Harry because Harry is a little magical lad and Vernon hates magic. He wants the magical and non-magical worlds to stay far apart and he's willing to go to extremes to keep them that way. We're also introduced to Harry's cousin Dudley, who is a spoiled bully who is also abusive to Harry. Dudley is going to a fancy private school, Smeltings, whereas Harry is going to Stonewall High, the local comprehensive, which Dudley implies is rough and full of bullies. Now, do I think it was intentional that Rowling called the scary school for poors that Harry is worried about attending Stonewall? Probably not, but it is funny.

Now, Harry's first contact with the Wizarding World, once he's older than a baby that is, is Hagrid, who turns up to deliver Harry's invitation to attend Hogwarts. Now, as he's introduced to us here, Hagrid is in many regards exactly the same as Vernon Dursley. Now, if any Harry Potter fans are listening, I'm sure you just raised an eyebrow at me comparing lovable old Hagrid to Harry's Uncle Vernon. But if we examine their actions and their beliefs, they are in many ways a mirror of each other. Hagrid is quick to anger. He threatens Vernon physically after he insults Albus Dumbledore. Hagrid is physically abusive. He uses magic to disfigure a child because he's having an argument with his father. He gives Dudley a pig's tail which has to be removed with surgery. Hagrid doesn't like people who are different from him—Muggles. He uses the word "Muggle" not just as a descriptor, but as an insult. It means mundane, dull, and unspecial. Hagrid wants the magical and non-magical worlds to stay far apart, and he's willing to support extremes to keep it that way. When Harry asks why the Ministry of Magic works to keep the existence of magic a secret, Hagrid responds, "Blimey, Harry, everyone would be wanting magic solutions to their problems. Nah, we're best left alone." One of Hagrid's functions in his introduction to Harry here is to serve as comeuppance for the Dursleys, to give them a taste of their own medicine. Hagrid and his magic are divine retribution. Dudley likes to bully people, so he gets bullied by Hagrid. Dudley was going to a fancier school than Harry, now Harry is going to a fancier school than him. Vernon likes to other those different to him, and so he gets othered by Hagrid, made into a Muggle. Now, while it might be satisfying from the audience's perspective to watch Dudley, who they know is a bully, be treated the way he treats others, from Hagrid's perspective he's just disfiguring a child he just met, you know? A similar scene happens in the fourth book when Fred and George Weasley poison Dudley with a sweet that makes his tongue grow to be a foot long, and then the next chapter opens with Harry and the Weasleys all laughing at Dudley. Now, this is strange. Firstly, the Weasley twins have never met Dudley before, so they poison him off secondhand information, basically. But also it's strange because Rowling forgets to have Dudley do anything bad in the opening of the fourth book. He doesn't do anything to Harry or anyone else. Rowling's just coasting off his previous bad behaviour in the earlier books. Well, actually, I tell a lie. Dudley does do one thing that J.K. Rowling considers to be very bad and worthy of punishment, and that is be overweight. Just in Goblet of Fire, for instance, we're treated to descriptions of Dudley being as big as a young killer whale, being wider than he is tall, too fat to hide behind his parents. We hear about his porky hands, his piggy eyes, his massive backside. And the comic relief of the opening chapters is that Dudley is struggling to stay on a diet. Harry even mocks him about this before sneaking off to eat some cakes that he's concealed. This is all why it's funny that Dudley later eats a poisoned sweet, I suppose. This is one of the things that really jumped out at me reading the Harry Potter books, just how much time is devoted early on in each story to making fun of Dudley for being overweight. Rowling just really seems to have it in for fat people, and she gets worse in The Casual Vacancy, published after the Harry Potter books, when one unsympathetic character is introduced in the following way: "He was an extravagantly obese man of 64. A great apron of stomach fell so far down in front of his thighs that most people thought instantly of his penis when they first clapped eyes on him, wondering when he had last seen it, how he washed it, how he managed to perform any of the acts for which a penis is designed." Now, I think it's very funny that this is apparently what J.K. Rowling thinks about when she sees a fat man.